---
title: "JS DOM - 04.01 - Mouse Events"
description: ""
summary: ""
date: 2025-02-12T14:03:31+05:30
lastmod: 2025-02-12T14:03:31+05:30
draft: false
weight: 535
toc: true
seo:
  title: "" # custom title (optional)
  description: "" # custom description (recommended)
  canonical: "" # custom canonical URL (optional)
  noindex: false # false (default) or true
---



### Mouse Event types

`mousedown/mouseup`
Mouse button is clicked/released over an element.

`mouseover/mouseout`
Mouse pointer comes over/out from an element.

`mousemove`
Every mouse move over an element triggers that event.

`click`
Triggers after `mousedown` and then `mouseup` over the same element if the left mouse button was used.

`dblclick`
Triggers after two clicks on the same element within a short time-frame. Rarely used nowadays.

`contextmenu`
Triggers when the right mouse button is pressed. 


### Event order
A left-button click first triggers `mousedown`, then `mouseup` and `click` when it’s released.

In cases when a single action initiates multiple events, their order is fixed. That is, the handlers are called in the order `mousedown` → `mouseup` → `click`.


### Mouse button
Click-related events always have the `button` property, which allows to get the exact mouse button.
`mousedown` and `mouseup` handlers may need `event.button`, because these events trigger on any button, so `button` allows to distinguish between “right-mousedown” and “left-mousedown”.


### Modifiers: shift, alt, ctrl and meta

All mouse events include the information about pressed modifier keys. 
They are `true` if the corresponding key was pressed during the event.

Event properties:
- `shiftKey`: Shift
- `altKey`: Alt (or Opt for Mac)
- `ctrlKey`: Ctrl
- `metaKey`: Cmd for Mac

```html
<button id='button'>press Alt+Shift+Click to work</button>

<script>
	button.onclick = function(event) {
		if(event.altKey && event.shiftKey) {
			alert( 'Hooray!' )
			}
		};
</script>
```



### Coordinates: clientX/Y, pageX/Y

All mouse events provide coordinates in two flavours:
1. Window-relative: `clientX` and `clientY`.
2. Document-relative: `pageX` and `pageY`.

`pageX/Y` document-relative coordinates are counted from the left-upper corner of the document, and do not change when the page is scrolled.

while `clientX/Y` are counted from the current window left-upper corner. When the page is scrolled, they change.

For instance, if we have a window of the size 500x500, and the mouse is in the left-upper corner, then `clientX` and `clientY` are `0`, no matter how the page is scrolled.

And if the mouse is in the center, then `clientX` and `clientY` are `250`, no matter what place in the document it is. They are similar to `position:fixed` in that aspect.

#### [Preventing selection on mousedown](https://javascript.info/mouse-events-basics#preventing-selection-on-mousedown)

The default browser action of `mousedown` is text selection, if it’s not good for the interface, then it should be prevented.


