---
title: "JS DOM - 04.02 - Moving Mouse"
description: ""
summary: ""
date: 2025-02-12T14:03:46+05:30
lastmod: 2025-02-12T14:03:46+05:30
draft: false
weight: 536
toc: true
seo:
  title: "" # custom title (optional)
  description: "" # custom description (recommended)
  canonical: "" # custom canonical URL (optional)
  noindex: false # false (default) or true
---



#### `mouseover`, `mouseout`, `relatedTarget`

The `mouseover` event occurs when a mouse pointer comes over an element, and `mouseout` – when it leaves.
These events are special, because they have property `relatedTarget`. This property complements `target`. When a mouse leaves one element for another, one of them becomes `target`, and the other one – `relatedTarget`.

For `mouseover`:
- `event.target` – is the element where the mouse came over.
- `event.relatedTarget` – is the element from which the mouse came (`relatedTarget` → `target`).

For `mouseout` the reverse:
- `event.target` – is the element that the mouse left.
- `event.relatedTarget` – is the new under-the-pointer element, that mouse left for (`target` → `relatedTarget`).

The `relatedTarget` property can be `null`.
Means that the mouse came not from another element, but from out of the window. Or that it left the window.


#### [Skipping elements](https://javascript.info/mousemove-mouseover-mouseout-mouseenter-mouseleave#skipping-elements)

The `mousemove` event triggers when the mouse moves. But that doesn’t mean that every pixel leads to an event.

The browser checks the mouse position from time to time. And if it notices changes then triggers the events.
That means that if the visitor is moving the mouse very fast then some DOM-elements may be skipped:


#### [Mouseout when leaving for a child](https://javascript.info/mousemove-mouseover-mouseout-mouseenter-mouseleave#mouseout-when-leaving-for-a-child)


#### [Events mouseenter and mouseleave](https://javascript.info/mousemove-mouseover-mouseout-mouseenter-mouseleave#events-mouseenter-and-mouseleave)
When the pointer enters an element – `mouseenter` triggers. The exact location of the pointer inside the element or its descendants doesn’t matter.

When the pointer leaves an element – `mouseleave` triggers.

1. Transitions inside the element, to/from descendants, are not counted.
2. Events `mouseenter/mouseleave` do not bubble.
