
# Complex Queries

>[!note] Syllabus
>**Additional features of SQL, Complex Queries:** Handling Null values, Nested and Co-Related Nested queries. (6.5)

## Nested Queries

* Some queries require that existing values in the database be fetched and then used in a comparison condition.  

* Such queries can be conveniently formulated by using nested queries, which are complete select-from-where blocks within the WHERE clause of another query.  

* That other query is called the outer query.  

* A complete SELECT query, called a nested query, can be specified within the WHERE-clause of another query, called the outer query.  

* Many of the previous queries can be specified in an alternative form using nesting.

**Example 1:** 
Retrieve the name and address of all employees who work for the 'Research' department.

```sql
SELECT FNAME, LNAME, ADDRESS
FROM EMPLOYEE
WHERE DNO IN (SELECT DNUMBER
              FROM DEPARTMENT
              WHERE DNAME='Research' );
````

**Example 2:**  
Make a list of all project numbers for projects that involve an employee whose last name is 'Smith' either as a worker or as a manager of the department that controls the project.

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT Pnumber FROM PROJECT
WHERE Pnumber IN (SELECT Pnumber 
                  FROM PROJECT, DEPARTMENT, EMPLOYEE 
                  WHERE Dnum=Dnumber 
					AND Mgr_ssn=Ssn 
					AND Lname='Smith')
				OR
		SELECT DISTINCT Pnumber FROM PROJECT
			WHERE Pnumber IN (SELECT Pno
                  FROM WORKS_ON, EMPLOYEE
                  WHERE Essn=Ssn AND Lname='Smith');
```

**Example 3:**  
Retrieve the Ssns of all employees who work on the same (project,hours) combination on some project that employee (whose Ssn is equal to ‘33344555’) works on.

```sql
SELECT DISTINCT Essn FROM WORKS_ON 
	WHERE (Pno,Hours) IN (SELECT (Pno,Hours) 
                      FROM WORKS_ON 
                      WHERE Essn='333445555');
```

## Other Operators

* `=ANY` (or `=SOME`) operator returns TRUE if the value v is equal to some value in the set V and is hence equivalent to IN  

* ANY and SOME have the same meaning  

* Other operators that can be combined with ANY (or SOME) include `>`, `>=`, `<`, `<=`, and `<>`  

* The keyword ALL also combined with each of these operators
	Eg., `(v>ALL V)`
    
- Returns TRUE if the value v is greater than all the values in the set V.

**Example:**  
Retrieve the names of employees whose salary is greater than the salary of all the employees in department 5

```sql
SELECT Fname, Lname 
FROM EMPLOYEE 
WHERE Salary > ALL (SELECT Salary 
                    FROM EMPLOYEE 
                    WHERE Dno=5);
```

## Ambiguity of attribute names

**Example**:  
Retrieve the name of each employee who has a dependent with the same first name and same sex as the employee.

```sql
SELECT E.Fname, E.Lname 
FROM EMPLOYEE E 
WHERE E.Ssn IN (SELECT Essn 
                FROM DEPENDENT 
                WHERE E.Fname = Dependent_name 
                AND E.Sex = Sex);
```

## Correlated nested queries

* If a condition in the WHERE-clause of a nested query references an attribute of a relation declared in the outer query, the two queries are said to be correlated.  

* The result of a correlated nested query is different for each tuple (or combination of tuples) of the relation(s) the outer query.

**Example** 1:  
Retrieve the name of each employee who has a dependent with the same first name as the employee.

```sql
SELECT E.FNAME, E.LNAME 
FROM EMPLOYEE AS E 
WHERE E.SSN IN (SELECT ESSN 
                FROM DEPENDENT 
                WHERE ESSN=E.SSN 
                AND E.FNAME=DEPENDENT_NAME);
```

**Example 2**:  
A query written with nested SELECT... FROM... WHERE... blocks and using the = or IN comparison operators can always be expressed as a single block query.

```sql
SELECT E.FNAME, E.LNAME 
FROM EMPLOYEE E, DEPENDENT D 
	WHERE E.SSN=D.ESSN 
		AND E.FNAME=D.DEPENDENT_NAME;
```

**Example 3:**  
Retrieve the name of each employee who works on all the projects controlled by department number 5.

```sql
SELECT FNAME, LNAME 
FROM EMPLOYEE 
WHERE ((SELECT PNO 
        FROM WORKS_ON 
        WHERE SSN=ESSN) 
        CONTAINS (SELECT PNUMBER 
                  FROM PROJECT 
                  WHERE DNUM=5));
```

## EXISTS Function

* EXISTS is used to check whether the result of a correlated nested query is empty (contains no tuples) or not  

* The result of EXISTS is a boolean value TRUE or FALSE

**Example 4:**  
Retrieve the name of each employee who has a dependent with the same first name as the employee.

```sql
SELECT FNAME, LNAME 
FROM EMPLOYEE 
WHERE EXISTS (SELECT * 
              FROM DEPENDENT 
              WHERE SSN=ESSN 
              AND FNAME=DEPENDENT_NAME);
```

**Example 5:**  
Retrieve the names of employees who have no dependents.

```sql
SELECT FNAME, LNAME 
FROM EMPLOYEE 
WHERE NOT EXISTS (SELECT * 
                  FROM DEPENDENT 
                  WHERE SSN=ESSN);
```

## Aggregate Functions

* SQL provides several built-in functions for computing certain types of aggregate values  

* COUNT, SUM, MAX, MIN, and AVG  

* COUNT(*) counts all rows in a specified table

**Example**:  
For each department, retrieve the department number, number of employees, and average salary

```sql
SELECT DNO, COUNT (*), AVG (SALARY) 
	FROM EMPLOYEE 
	GROUP BY DNO;
```

## Grouping

* GROUP BY clause specifies the grouping attributes, which should also appear in the SELECT clause

**Example**:  
For each department, retrieve the department number, the number of employees in the department, and their average salary.

```sql
SELECT DNO, COUNT (*), AVG (SALARY) 
	FROM EMPLOYEE 
	GROUP BY DNO;
```

* The EMPLOYEE tuples are divided into groups – each group having the same value for the grouping attribute DNO.  

* The COUNT and AVG functions are applied to each such group of tuples separately. 

* The SELECT-clause includes only the grouping attribute and the functions to be applied on each group of tuples.  

* A join condition can be used in conjunction with grouping  

* If NULLs exist in the grouping attribute, then a separate group is created for all tuples with a NULL value in the grouping attribute.

**Example**:  
For each project, retrieve the project number, project name, and the number of employees who work on that project.

```sql
SELECT PNUMBER, PNAME, COUNT (*) 
	FROM PROJECT, WORKS_ON 
	WHERE PNUMBER=PNO 
	GROUP BY PNUMBER, PNAME;
```

## The HAVING Clause

* To retrieve the values of these functions for only those groups that satisfy certain conditions.  

* The HAVING-clause is used for specifying a selection condition on groups (rather than on individual tuples).

**Example**:  
For each project on which more than two employees work, retrieve the project number, project name, and the number of employees who work on that project.

```sql
SELECT PNUMBER, PNAME, COUNT(*) 
	FROM PROJECT, WORKS_ON 
	WHERE PNUMBER=PNO 
	GROUP BY PNUMBER, PNAME 
	HAVING COUNT (*) > 2;
```

## WHERE vs. HAVING

* Selection conditions in the WHERE clause limit the tuples to which functions are applied  

* The HAVING clause serves to choose whole groups

**Example**:  
For each project, retrieve the project number, the project name, and the number of employees from department 5 who work on the project.

```sql
SELECT Pnumber, Pname, COUNT (*) 
	FROM PROJECT, WORKS_ON, EMPLOYEE 
		WHERE Pnumber=Pno 
			AND Ssn=Essn 
			AND Dno=5 
	GROUP BY Pnumber, Pname;
```

**Example**:  
For each department that has more than five employees, retrieve the department number and the number of its employees who are making more than $40,000.

```sql
SELECT Dnumber, COUNT (*) 
	FROM DEPARTMENT, EMPLOYEE 
		WHERE Dnumber=Dno 
			AND Salary>40000 
			AND (SELECT Dno 
				FROM EMPLOYEE 
				GROUP BY Dno 
				HAVING COUNT (*) > 5);
```

