---
title: "JS DOM - 03.04 - Events Related"
description: ""
summary: ""
date: 2025-02-12T14:01:53+05:30
lastmod: 2025-02-12T14:01:53+05:30
draft: false
weight: 528
toc: true
seo:
  title: "" # custom title (optional)
  description: "" # custom description (recommended)
  canonical: "" # custom canonical URL (optional)
  noindex: false # false (default) or true
---


#### [Bubbling and capturing](https://javascript.info/bubbling-and-capturing)

The bubbling principle is simple.
**When an event happens on an element, it first runs the handlers on it, then on its parent, then all the way up on other ancestors.**

The process is called “bubbling”, because events “bubble” from the inner element up through parents like a bubble in the water.

Bubbling and capturing lay the foundation for “event delegation” – an extremely powerful event handling pattern.

________

#### [Event Delegation](https://javascript.info/event-delegation)

The idea is that if we have a lot of elements handled in a similar way, then instead of assigning a handler to each of them – we put a single handler on their common ancestor.

In the handler we get `event.target` to see where the event actually happened and handle it.

___________

#### [Browser action](https://javascript.info/default-browser-action)

There are many default browser actions:
- `mousedown` – starts the selection (move the mouse to select).
- `click` on `<input type="checkbox">` – checks/unchecks the `input`.
- `submit` – clicking an `<input type="submit">` or hitting Enter inside a form field causes this event to happen, and the browser submits the form after it.
- `keydown` – pressing a key may lead to adding a character into a field, or other actions.
- `contextmenu` – the event happens on a right-click, the action is to show the browser context menu.
- …there are more…

All the default actions can be prevented if we want to handle the event exclusively by JavaScript.

To prevent a default action – use either `event.preventDefault()` or `return false`. The second method works only for handlers assigned with `on<event>`.

The `passive: true` option of `addEventListener` tells the browser that the action is not going to be prevented. That’s useful for some mobile events, like `touchstart` and `touchmove`, to tell the browser that it should not wait for all handlers to finish before scrolling.

If the default action was prevented, the value of `event.defaultPrevented` becomes `true`, otherwise it’s `false`.
