---
title: "JS DOM - 01.02 - Navigating DOM"
description: ""
summary: ""
date: 2024-11-09T17:13:52+05:30
lastmod: 2024-11-09T17:13:52+05:30
draft: false
weight: 502
toc: true
seo:
  title: "" # custom title (optional)
  description: "" # custom description (recommended)
  canonical: "" # custom canonical URL (optional)
  noindex: false # false (default) or true
---


#### On top: 'documnetElement' and body

The topmost tree nodes are available directly as `document` properties:     
`<body> = document.body`     
`<head> = document.head`    

____

### Children: 'childNodes', 'firstChild', 'lastChild'

Child nodes are elements that are direct children. They are nested in the given one.     
Descendants are all the elements that are nested in the given one, including their children and so on.     
The `childNodes` collection lists all child nodes, including text nodes.

```js
<script>
	for (let i=0; i < document.body.childNodes.length; i++) {
		alert( document.body.childNodes[i] );
		}  // Text, Div, Text, Ul, ... script
```

`firstChild` and `lastChild` give fast access to the first and last child.
```js
elem.childNodes[0] === elem.firstChild
elem.childNodes[ elem.childNodes.length - 1] === elem.lastChild
```

___

### DOM collections

`childNodes` looks like an array, but the collection is an array-like iterable object.     
`for..of` can be used to iterate over them. But array methods wont work.
```js
for (let node of document.body.childNodes) {
	alert(node);     // shows all nodes from collection
}
```

`Array.from` can be used create a real array from the collection if array methods are needed.
```js
alert( Array.from(document.body.childNodes).filter );   // function
```

DOM collections are readable only, assignment doesn't work.

___

### Element-only navigation

Navigation properties listed above refer to _all_ nodes. In `childNodes` we can see both text nodes, element nodes, and even comment nodes if they exist.    
But for many tasks we don’t want text or comment nodes. We want to manipulate element nodes that represent tags and form the structure of the page.

- `children` – only those children that are element nodes.
- `firstElementChild`, `lastElementChild` – first and last element children.
- `previousElementSibling`, `nextElementSibling` – neighbor elements.
- `parentElement` – parent element.  (same as `parentNode`)

Replacing `childNodes` with `children` shows only elements.
```html
<script>
	for (let elem of document.body.children) {
		alert( document.body.childNodes[i] );
		}  // Div, Ul, Div ... script
</script>
```


There are two main sets of them:   

- For all nodes: `parentNode`, `childNodes`, `firstChild`, `lastChild`, `previousSibling`, `nextSibling`.
- For element nodes only: `parentElement`, `children`, `firstElementChild`, `lastElementChild`, `previousElementSibling`, `nextElementSibling`.

Some types of DOM elements, e.g. tables, provide additional properties and collections to access their content.
