---
title: "JS DOM - 01.03 - Text and Html Content"
description: ""
summary: ""
date: 2024-11-09T17:14:26+05:30
lastmod: 2024-11-09T17:14:26+05:30
draft: false
weight: 503
toc: true
seo:
  title: "" # custom title (optional)
  description: "" # custom description (recommended)
  canonical: "" # custom canonical URL (optional)
  noindex: false # false (default) or true
---


#### Adding text content and HTML content
```js
div.textContent = "Hello World!";
// creates a text node containing "hello world" and inserts it in div

div.innerHTML = "<span>Hello World!</span>";
// renders the HTML inside div
```
It is preferred to using text content over inner html for adding text to avoid security risks.


### innerHTML

The [innerHTML](https://w3c.github.io/DOM-Parsing/#the-innerhtml-mixin) property allows to get the HTML inside the element as a string.    
We can also modify it. So it’s one of the most powerful ways to change the page.
```html
<script>
	alert( documnet.body.innerHTML ); // read current content
	document.body.innerHTML = 'The new body';  // replace it
</script>
```
We can append HTML to an element by using `elem.innerHTML += "more html"`     
what’s going on is _not_ an addition, but a full overwrite.     
In other words, `innerHTML+=` does this:      
1. The old contents is removed.
2. The new `innerHTML` is written instead (a concatenation of the old and the new one).

**As the content is “zeroed-out” and rewritten from the scratch, all images and other resources will be reloaded**.

### outerHTML

The `outerHTML` property contains the full HTML of the element. That’s like `innerHTML` plus the element itself.
```html
<script>
	alert( elem.outerHTML ); // <div id='elem'> Hello </div>
</script>
```

**writing to `outerHTML` does not change the element. Instead, it replaces it in the DOM.**

The `outerHTML` assignment does not modify the DOM element , but removes it from the DOM and inserts the new HTML in its place.     
So what happened in `div.outerHTML=...` is:    
- `div` was removed from the document.
- Another piece of HTML `<p>A new element</p>` was inserted in its place.
- `div` still has its old value. The new HTML wasn’t saved to any variable.

It’s so easy to make an error here: modify `div.outerHTML` and then continue to work with `div` as if it had the new content in it. But it doesn’t. Such thing is correct for `innerHTML`, but not for `outerHTML`.


### textContent

The `textContent` provides access to the _text_ inside the element: only text, minus all `<tags>`

**Writing to `textContent` is much more useful, because it allows to write text the “safe way”.**

An arbitrary string, for instance entered by a user, and want to show it.
- With `innerHTML` we’ll have it inserted “as HTML”, with all HTML tags.
- With `textContent` we’ll have it inserted “as text”, all symbols are treated literally.

```html
<div id = "elem1" ></div>
<div id = "elem2" ></div>

<script>
	let name = prompt("What's your name?", "<b>Winnie-the-Pooh!</b>");

	elem1.innerHTML = name;
	emel2.textContent = name;
</script>
```

1. The first `<div>` gets the name “as HTML”: all tags become tags, so we see the bold name.
2. The second `<div>` gets the name “as text”, so we literally see `<b>Winnie-the-Pooh!</b>`.

In most cases, we expect the text from a user, and want to treat it as text. We don’t want unexpected HTML in our site. An assignment to `textContent` does exactly that.



## The hidden property

The “hidden” attribute and the DOM property specifies whether the element is visible or not.

```html
<div> Both divs below are hidden </div>

<div hidden>wit the attribute "hidden"</div>

<div id="elem">Javascript assigned property hidden</div>

<script>
	elem.hidden = true;
</script>
```
`hidden` works the same as `style="display:none"`. But it’s shorter to write.

Here’s a blinking element:
```html
<div id="elem">A blinking element</div>

<script>
	setInterval( () => elem.hidden = !elem.hidden, 1000);
</script>
```



### More properties
DOM elements also have additional properties, in particular those that depend on the class:

- `value` – the value for `<input>`, `<select>` and `<textarea>` (`HTMLInputElement`, `HTMLSelectElement`…).
- `href` – the “href” for `<a href="...">` (`HTMLAnchorElement`).
- `id` – the value of “id” attribute, for all elements (`HTMLElement`).
```html
<input type="text" id="elem" value="value">

<script>
	alert( elem.type);   // text
	alert( elem.id);  // elem
	alert( elem.value);  // value
</script>
```

